---
title: Cluster networking architecture
---

EDB Cloud clusters can be exposed to client applications in two ways -
"Public", where the cluster is available on the Internet, and
"Private", where access to the cluster is restricted to specific
sources and network traffic never leaves the Azure network.

## Basic architecture

When you create your first cluster in a region, EDB Cloud deploys a
dedicated virtual network (VNet) in Azure to host all clusters and
supporting management services.

This VNet is named after the region where the cluster is deployed. 
For example, if the cluster is deployed in the East US region, it is
named `vnet-eastus`. This VNet uses IP addresses in the
`10.240.0.0.16` space.

## Public cluster load balancing

When a cluster is created with public network access, an Azure
Standard SKU Load Balancer is created and configured with a public IP
address that will always route to the leader of your cluster. Once
assigned, this IP address will not change unless you change the
networking configuration for your cluster.

Only one Azure Load Balancer is typically deployed in your Azure
Subscription per EDB Cloud region; subsequent public clusters will add
additional IP addresses to the existing load balancer.

## Private cluster load balancing

When a cluster is created with public network access, an Azure
Standard SKU Load Balancer is created and configured with an IP
address that will always route to the leader of your cluster. Once
assigned, this IP address will not change unless you change the
networking configuration for your cluster.

This IP address is private to the VNet hosting your EDB Cloud
services; by default it is not routable from other networks, even in
your Azure account. See [Setting up Azure infrastructure to connect to a private network cluster](../../using_cluster/connecting_your_cluster/#setting-up-azure-infrastructure-to-connect-to-a-private-network-cluster) for details and instructions
on how to properly configure routing for private clusters.

Only one Azure Internal Load Balancer is typically deployed in your
Azure Subscription per EDB Cloud region; subsequent private clusters
will add additional IP addresses to the existing load balancer.

## DNS

Every EDB Cloud cluster, regardless of public or private networking
status, is assigned a single DNS zone that maps to its exposed IP
address, either public or private. When toggling between public and
private, please wait up to 120 seconds for DNS caches to flush.

## Toggling between public and private

Clusters can be changed from public to private and vice versa at any
time. When this happens, the IP address previously assigned to the
cluster is de-allocated, a new one is assigned, and DNS is updated
accordingly.


